Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.14462v1
Copy-paste: 

AI auditing: The Broken Bus on the Road to AI
Accountability
Abeba Birhane
Mozilla Foundation and
Sch. of Computer Science and Statistics
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
Briana Vecchione
arXiv:2401.14462v1  [cs.CY]  25 Jan 2024
Data & Society
New York City, USA
Ryan Steed
Heinz College & Machine Learning Dept.
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
Victor Ojewale
Ctr. for Technological Responsibility,
Reimagination, & Redesign
Brown University
Providence, USA
Inioluwa Deborah Raji
Mozilla Foundation and
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, USA
Abstract—One of the most concrete measures to take towards
meaningful AI accountability is to consequentially assess and re
port the systems’ performance and impact. However, the practical
nature of the “AI audit” ecosystem is muddled and imprecise,
making it difficult to work through various concepts and map out
the stakeholders involved in the practice. First, we taxonomize
current AI audit practices as completed by regulators, law firms,
civil society, journalism, academia, consulting agencies. Next, we
assess the impact of audits done by stakeholders within each
domain. We find that only a subset of AI audit studies translate
to desired accountability outcomes. We thus assess and isolate
practices necessary for effective AI audit results, articulating
the observed connections between AI audit design, methodology
and institutional context on its effectiveness as a meaningful
mechanism for accountability.
AUDIT STUDIES
Ecosystem Audits
Product Audits
Meta
Commentary
Non-audits
Model Audits
Dataset 
Audits
Index Terms—Evaluation, auditing, accountability, trans
parency, artificial intelligence, society, law, machine learning, data
science
I. INTRODUCTION
The widespread use of artificial intelligence (AI) systems
is heavily weighed down by its multitude of related risks.
Functional failures [1], disparate performance [2, 3, 4], em
bedded stereotypes [5, 6, 7], legal incompatibility [8], privacy
violations [9], model inscrutability [10] and many more issues
plague almost every use case.
Algorithm 
Audits
Fig. 1. Audit studies considered in our survey, classified by their scope.
Audits are a routine practice in various sectors including
finance, public management, healthcare, food safety, and com
mercial retail [11, 12]. The adoption of audits within the
AI space, however, is relatively new. Despite its imprecision,
we use the term “artificial intelligence” (AI) to encompass a
wide range of deployed products with a significant algorith
mic or data-defined component, including but not limited to
risk assessments, large base models for computer vision and
language, classification models, “generative” models, and rec
ommendation systems. The inspiration for audit practice in the
field of data science, machine learning (ML), and AI derives
from a variety of related disciplines. Online platform audits,
for example, cite social science and critical race studies as
inspiration [13, 14], as do several audits of automated decision
systems (ADS) and risk assessments [15]. Some audits of large
language models take after security audits [16]. Some risk
assessment evaluations follow models from traditional exper
imental design [17], including clinical trials [18]. Meanwhile,
internal auditors derive their practice from regulated industries
such as finance, aerospace and medical devices [19].
Across disciplines and contexts, one of the main motivations
for conducting audits of AI systems is establishing informed
and consequential judgements of the deployed AI systems
that is algorithmic accountability [20]. We thus define an AI
audit to be any evaluation of these AI systems, independent
of the AI development process, executed for the purpose of
accountability [21].
However, unlike other, more mature audit industries, AI
audit studies do not consistently translate into more concrete
objectives to regulate system outcomes, such as influencing
voluntary corporate action or internal corporate policies, in
citing product recalls, informing product re-designs, as well
as shaping broader governmental policy and regulation in the
form of standards, bans, restrictions or moratoriums of use. In
the AI audit context, such impact is fairly uncommon. In this
paper, with the aim of enabling auditors and policymakers
to achieve accountability outcomes , we taxonomize audit
practices and identify the characteristics of audits that most
directly and effectively contribute to audit objectives.
Some initial work has been done to taxonomize various
aspects of AI auditing. Many of these efforts have focused
on categorizing methods [13, 15, 22, 23, 24], or types of
audit organizations [25, 12]. Some efforts have also looked
at an AI audit’s broader institutional [26, 19], policy [12], and
societal context [15], through these analyses are often limited
to one or at most a handful of case studies. Bandy [27] is
one of few efforts that systematically classifed audit studies
by a broader set of criteria– audit method, audit target, audit
domain and audit objective. However, the study is narrow in
scope, consisting of 62 exclusively academic audit studies.
In this paper, we take a much broader and more compre
hensive view than past studies. We review the broad audit
landscape consisting of academia and six other domains,
taxonomizing the key characteristics of their context, goals
and practice (Figure 1). Notably, as a mechanism for achieving
accountability, we investigate the consequences of these audit
investigations and how well the outcomes from the studies
match those stated objectives.
II. BACKGROUND
A. What is an AI audit?
In the context of this paper, we consider the operationaliza
tion of audits as a mechanism for accountability in computing
— notably for AI, machine learning, data science, and related
fields. We begin by proving definitions.
Definition 1: An audit is defined as any independent as
sessment of an identified audit target via an evaluation of
articulated expectations with the implicit or explicit objective
of accountability.
Care must be taken to translate this definition in the AI con
text. By independent assessment, we mean any measurement
done by an entity operationally distinct from the team that
engineered the examined AI system. Even if that team is within
the same company and composed of corporate employees,
the examination only counts as an audit if the auditors are
adequately separate from those that built the system, or the
audit process itself is distinct from the engineering process for
the AI system [19, 12]. By an identified audit target, we look
to studies and investigations that name a concrete and non
abstract, specific object of examination. Ideally, this target is
connected to a real-world AI deployment, though sometimes a
widely used open-source algorithm or dataset can operate as a
stand-in or proxy. For instance, Steed and Caliskan [28] looked
at bias in an open-source image generation model, reflecting
issues later discovered in similar commercial products [29];
and an audit of Proctorio was conducted on the open source
model OpenCV on which the commercial product is built [30].
Due to a lack of training data disclosure for most AI products
(even supposedly “open source” models [31]), many data
audits investigate open source datasets [32, 33, 34] and attempt
to generalize conclusions on broader industry practice. Studies
of prototypical algorithms (hypothetical models trained by the
authors) without concrete, specific targets were not considered.
To be an evaluation with the objective of accountability, the
audit must incorporate some implied or explicit objective to
have the assessment play some role informing consequential
judgements about the technology being examined. In order
for these judgements to be more concrete, there needs to be
some measurement between the reality of the AI deployment
and articulated expectations held about a particular deploy
ment. Many academic papers that we examined, for example,
studying fairness, performance or safety in an abstract man
ner [35], without connecting it to anticipated accountability
outcome, even implicitly, were not considered by us to be
audits [36]. Note that the actual type of audit target or criteria
of assessment are not part of the definition of what constitutes
an audit. AI audits can thus encompass a wide range of
targets, including automated decision systems (ADS) [37, 38],
recommendation systems underlying online platforms or apps
[39, 40], large base models in computer vision [28, 41],
speech [42], text-based natural language processing [16], or
multimodal models [43]. At times, the evaluations involve
domain-specific considerations in hiring [44], healthcare [2],
criminal justice [45] or social service delivery [46]. The
expectations articulated for these systems can also vary in
concreteness and specificity. For instance, some conduct audits
specifically for legal compliance [47] while others declare ex
pectations more normatively [36]. Others yet are not explicitly
labelled as audit work yet satisfy our audit criteria and result
in immense explicit and gradual structural change [48, 49]. As
a result, we can observe audits that can evaluate and diagnose
for a range of performance, safety concerns, as well as broader
societal injustices and are not limited to fairness.
B. Who conducts AI audits?
There is a wide range of possible audit practitioners that
participate in the audit process [25], often described as below.
Definition 2: An internal auditor is an entity executing
an audit or investigation with some contractual relationship
with the audit target [12]. They typically seek to minimize
corporate liability and test for compliance to corporate or
industry-wide expectations [19]. In policy, internal auditors are
typically those designated to carry out mandatory corporate
audit requirements (e.g. the “independent auditors” in Article
37 of the Digital Services Act).
Definition 3: An external auditor is an entity executing an
audit or investigation without any contractual relationship with
the audit target [12]. They typically execute audits voluntarily
with a broader mandate of identifying and minimizing the
harm impacting their constituents.
Internal audits require a contractual relationship with the
audit target. Internal audits are typically conducted by an
organization hired by the audit target voluntarily or to maintain
compliance with a required legal audit mandate. The auditor in
these contexts are hired to operate in a professional capacity to
audit the target. This often means they are selected and paid by
the audit target, though that is not always necessarily the case
(e.g., auditors selected and paid by the government). These
are the auditors typically referenced in audit mandates. As the
executors of more formal audit requirements, these auditors
are ideally certified or otherwise qualified [12], and subject to
some form of external oversight and quality control, including
but not limited to auditor conduct and reporting standards.
External auditors typically conduct audits voluntarily by
organizations, typically with a broader mandate of research
or advocacy. These auditors are not assigned an audit target
and do not execute audits on behalf of the audit target but
choose to study systems based on the needs and concerns
of their constituents. Without any formal connection to the
audit target, these auditors typically struggle to access the
information necessary to conduct a thorough investigation.
Furthermore, without any form of legal protection, data access
regime, or oversight, these auditors tend to operate quite in
dependently, taking on whatever methods suit their objectives.
These auditors can be vulnerable to corporate retaliation and
methodological skepticism after audit results are released.
C. How are AI audits conducted?
Although the specific methods used in the execution of AI
audits vary widely, some terminology are deployed regularly
to describe how audits are executed. Audits can be conducted
ex ante (before deployment), in media res (during an iterative
process of design and restricted re-deployment) or ex post
(after widespread adoption and use). Furthermore, although
the details of the AI audit process varies widely, the high
level structure of that process follows similar stages, which
we describe using the taxonomy from [50]. Note that not all
audits follow all these processes.
1) Harms Discovery: This is the stage of discovering what
to audit for. It involves identifying the audit target entity,
possible targeted populations, and the anticipated form of harm
or measurement required for a meaningful audit. This can
happen, for example, via direct reporting from the impacted
population [51], active investigation from the auditors, or other
methods [52].
2) Standards Identification: This stage is about effectively
articulating the requirements for an ideal AI audit outcome, by
naming the standards the auditors will be holding the target to
in the evaluation process. These expectations can be as vague
as a set of named AI principles [53] or as precise as a specific
threshold of performance (e.g., AI hiring tools’ adherence to
the 4/5ths rule [54]).
3) Performance Analysis: The core of the audit is the actual
evaluation itself. There are a wide diversity of methods avail
able to inform final assessments, ranging from qualitative to
quantitative approaches [55]. Each method involves different
degrees of complexity and challenges tied to data acquisition,
model access, and measurement.
4) Audit Communication and Advocacy: Following the
evaluation of the AI system, there is often also some activity
to disseminate and translate audit results to some relevant
stakeholders. That audience could include the audit target,
regulators and the public [36, 56]—but could also include
internal stakeholders within the organization such as a legal,
business, product or engineering team [19].
III. METHODS
In order to review the AI audit research and practice
landscape, we conducted a wide-ranging literature review of
academic work published in a range of venues. We reviewed
websites, reports, and relevant documentations from numerous
non-academic audit practitioners. For academic research, we
collected a comprehensive sample of N = 341 audit studies
published in interdisciplinary computing and related venues
from 2018–2022. Figure 2 shows the number of collected
academic studies published per year, grouped by audit label
type, while Table I describes our search method for each
source and lists the number of identified pieces of literature
collected for each. For audit practices outside academia, we
identified major domains that are both relatively established
in existing academic literature and currently emerging as
key players in the AI audit ecosystem (inspired by the
main categories identified by [25]): journalism, civil society,
government, consulting agencies and corporate audits, and
legal firms. We collected specific cases that serve as concrete
examples of each domain. These methodological choices not
only facilitate coherence with existing scholarship but also
enhance the reliability and comparability of our findings within
broader academic discourse on the subject.
Our list is not exhaustive of all academic audit literature
or audit domains, but it provides the most comprehensive
sample (to our knowledge) of the current state of AI audit
ecosystem, encompassing from academic research to practice
and everything in-between. The full list of audit studies we
found using these methods is included in the supplementary
information (see Appendix A).
A. Academic literature
Audits in the academic context, conducted by authors from
universities, non-profits, and tech companies, encompass a
wide variety of disciplines, methods, and aims. Academic
audits are published in various formats and venues, for ex
ample, as books, journals, and conference proceedings. Over
the past five years, interdisciplinary computing conferences
have become a central place where work around the topics
of fairness, accountability, and transparency is discussed and
published, especially within the ACM conferences, FAccT
and AIES, two emerging main conferences in the space. In
this regard, conference proceedings are not only the most
common way of sharing work amongst the AI ethics (broadly
defined) community, but such formats of publication also share
commonalities such as relatively standardised style and presen
tation. We have, therefore, selected conference proceedings as
a primary focus for our systematic reviews of academic audits.
Audit Type
2022
Year published
2021
2020
2019
2018
Product/Model/
Algo. Audit
Data Audit
Ecosystem
Audit
Meta−
Commentary
0
25
50
# audit studies
75
100
Fig. 2. Number of collected academic audit studies published in each year,
grouped by manually labelled audit type. Studies that involve multiple audit
types are counted only under the best-fitting category.
Our search is not exhaustive—it did not, for example,
include potential audit work that might have been covered in
high-impact general audience journals such as Science, Nature,
or PNAS. We also did not consider work published in non
interdisciplinary social science venues—in particular, work
from economics or sociology. Instead, our sample represents
the kinds of audit work recently published at interdisciplinary
computing and related conferences.
1) Searching for audit studies: We found N = 341 aca
demic papers that met our criteria for an audit study (Figure 2,
Table I). We identified academic audit studies with two meth
ods. First, we manually reviewed the conference proceedings
from 2018 to 2022 for a selection of smaller interdisciplinary
computing conferences: Fairness, Accountability, and Trans
parency (FAccT), Artificial Intelligence, Ethics, and Society
(AIES), Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and
Optimization (EAAMO), Association for the Advancement
of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), Computer-Supported Co
operative Work & Social Computing (CSCW), International
Conference on Computational Social Science (IC2S2), and
the International World Wide Web Conference (WWW). We
selected these conferences as venues where audit work is likely
to appear, but still, audits are not the primary focus of these
conferences. Of the 5 years of proceedings we reviewed, only
N =237 papers met our criteria for an audit study.
Second, to expand our search to other, larger conferences,
we automated the inclusion process: we applied keyword
searches to both the ACM Digital Library (excluding FAccT,
AIES, and CSCW proceedings, which we reviewed manually)
and the ACL Anthology. In these two libraries, we searched
for papers published from 2018 to 2022 with one or more
of six keywords in the title: “audit”, “accountability”, “case
study”, “bias”, “fairness”, and “assurance”. For ACL, where
the searches were web-based, we manually reviewed the search
results for audit studies online, downloading only the few stud
ies that met our criteria (N = 6). For ACM, we downloaded
the search results. There were thousands of papers in the
queries in total. Three of the keywords yielded relatively few
ACM entries: “audit” (N = 39), “accountability” (N = 87),
and “assurance” (N = 65), after removing duplicates. For the
rest of the keywords, which returned over 500 results each, we
narrowed our manual search by considering only the first 500
“most relevant” entries returned by the ACM search engine.
After removing duplicates and other incomplete entries, each
keyword yielded the following number of pieces of literature:
“fairness” (N = 404), “bias” (N = 318), and “case study”
(N = 472). We further excluded everything that is not a
standard academic paper (such as panels, abstracts, workshops,
and tutorials) for consistency. We then manually reviewed each
abstract and, as before, excluded those that did not meet our
criteria for an audit study, leaving a total of N = 103 audit
studies from ACM conferences other than FAccT and AIES.
2) Classifying audit types: We classified all the audit stud
ies we collected into two main categories: audit studies and
meta-commentary (depicted in Figure 1). We further classified
audit studies into two kinds: product/model/algorithm audit
studies and data audit studies. Some studies targeted specific
products (e.g., YouTube comment moderation [57]); others
targeted only the AI models behind the products (e.g., an
investigation of tax audit models used by the IRS [58]);
still others targeted only the algorithms used to build the
model (e.g., pre-trained large language models such as GPT
3 [59]). Since the methodologies for these kinds of audits
are similar, we classify them together. We distinguish these
studies from data audit studies—also a kind of model audit—
which specifically target training or benchmark datasets (e.g.,
ImageNet [60]) and tend to use different methodologies.
During the iterative classification process, an additional
category emerged: ecosystem audit studies. Ecosystem audit
go beyond datasets, models, and products and examine com
munities and sociotechnical environments (digital or physical)
impacted by or are critical components to an AI system’s
operation. Brown et al. [61], for example, audited the impact
of child welfare service algorithms by conducting interac
tive workshops with front-line service providers and families
affected by such algorithms. Meta-commentary studies are
those that examine auditing as a practice, including studies
that put forward novel mechanisms and processes as a viable
method for auditing certain systems as well as those proposing
to improve existing audit processes. Meta-commentary also
includes critiques, work that interrogates the effectiveness and
merit of auditing as a practice.
Note that not all papers fit neatly into one of the above
categories, and sometimes we find some papers incorporating
elements of two—and, rarely, three—categories. For example,
methodology papers often also use a specific case study to
TABLE I
AUDIT LITERATURE FROM ACADEMIC SOURCES
Source
Search method
N
FAccT
AIES
EAAMO, AAAI, IC2S2,
and WWW
Manual review of proceedings —
titles and abstracts, then full paper
where classification still unclear
”
”
55
40
137
Other ACM proceedings
ACL Anthology
Keyword filters, then manual review
”
Total
103
6
341
illustrate the method in practice. In our analysis (Fig. 2), we
consider only the classification that best fits the paper.
B. Non-academic domains
For audit work outside the academic domain, we identified
the following categories where audits are regularly conducted
and becoming an established practice: journalism, civil society,
law firms, regulatory audits, and consulting agencies and
corporate audits. For each category, we gathered sources, often
information on auditors websites, audit reports, and other
relevant documentation produced by various bodies (whenever
they are available), which we reference in our analysis (§V).
Based on information from these sources, for each category
we identified a number of institutions, organisations, agencies,
or audit reports that served as concrete examples of the given
category. Appendix A lists all the reports, webpages, and other
documents we reviewed in each audit category and institution.
C. Analysis
For both the academic audits and each non-academic audit
source, we reviewed published audit studies, documents, and
public webpages to summarize information on the following:
1) Context: Context includes the specific structural factors
shaping the audit (all as stated by the auditor): what motivated
the audit (Motivations), its goals (Goals), the main artefact or
system under investigation (Audit Target), the specific harms or
concerns investigated (Types of Harms), and ways in which the
audit may or may not shift power between stakeholders [62]
(Institutional Context).
2) Methodology: Methodology includes the main tech
niques and procedures used to investigate the target artefact—
for example, quantitative evaluation (typical in academic audit
studies) or forensic analysis or qualitative interviews (found
more often in civil society audits).
3) Impact: Impact refers to changes that occur to the target
artefact, the target audit, or the institutional environment as a
direct consequence of the audit. Impacts could include policy
developments, alterations to an algorithm, or monetary fines
for certain violations. While impacts are well documented in
some domains (e.g., journalism), the impact of an academic
audit, for example, is not often clear at the time an audit is
published. Detecting, measuring, and quantifying impact is
challenging. Subsequently, we were as inclusive as possible
of many different kinds of impacts, e.g., inspiring media
coverage of an overlooked harm [63]. We considered notable
documented evidence in the audit reports themselves or from
related news stories, whenever available. In our analysis, we
make a note wherever documented impacts were unstated and
unclear (in academia, for example).
For nearly all the academic studies we found, our dataset
includes abstracts (N = 337) and author-selected keywords
(N =263). In order to supplement our qualitative findings for
academia (§IV) with quantitative statistics, we analysed key
terms (e.g., “accountability”) that were used most frequently
by authors. Appendix B describes how we selected key terms
related to the criteria above.
IV. RESULTS: AUDITING IN ACADEMIA
A. Audit types
1) Product/model/algorithm audits: Most audit work fell
under the category of product-level case studies. These audit
studies target a mix of social media platforms, algorithms for
administering public services, large language and vision mod
els, and search engines. These case studies typically evaluate
specific deployed systems. These case studies mainly diagnose
failures, errors, disparities. For example, some variation of
“bias” is mentioned in 32.5%, and “fairness” in 21.2% of
abstracts (see Table B-IV). Less commonly, these studies call
for model builders and practitioners to make amendments
accordingly. For example, the term “accountability” appeared
in only 14% of abstracts, less often than in ecosystem audits
(33.3%) or meta-commentary (28.1%).
2) Data audits: Data audits typically focus on evaluating
specific datasets, often targeting datasets used to train large
models [64] and sometimes interrogate the benchmark datasets
used for model evaluation, such as COMPAS [65]. Often
times, these studies emphasise (both implied and explicit)
shifting norms around data use and benchmarking practices,
while fewer explicitly emphasize holding dataset creators
accountable. For example, “accountability” is mentioned in
9% of data audit abstracts, while “bias” is mentioned in
39.1% of abstracts (more in this category than any other).
These studies typically focus on surfacing harms ranging from
representation and stereotyping to privacy and, more recently,
copyright protection [66]. The type of methods used include
quantitative measurement (such as the incidence of NSFW
images), simulation, ablation (removing or changing certain
aspects of the dataset and measuring the result), and critical
assessment. Like case studies, data audits tend to be conducted
by a range of academic, non-profit, and corporate authors
examining open-sourced and academic datasets.
3) Ecosystem audits: These studies target public services
—predictive risk models used by child welfare agencies, for
example [67, 61]—more often than any other kinds of audits.
Abstracts of these studies also mention specific domains such
as hiring and education more often than any other audit type
(Table B-V). Harms and concerns are often concretely defined
and audit are typically carried out with the expectation of
subsequent change both to specific stakeholders and some
times, society at large. The term “accountability”, for example,
is mentioned in over 33% of ecosystem audit abstracts, the
highest of any category. is goal, These studies often utilise a
wider range of methods, including qualitative interviews, sur
veys, workshops, and literature reviews [68, 69, 70]. Given the
scope of investigation, methods are often all-encompassing and
diffuse, less precise than more scoped audit investigations [71],
where they are much more likely to employ qualitative and
participatory methods than other audit studies. 6 out of 15
ecosystem audit abstracts, for example, mention ethnography,
interviews, workshops, or other qualitative methods, while two
explicitly use the term “participatory” (see Table B-VI).
4) Meta-commentary & critique: We found that 28.1% of
meta-commentaries mention “accountability” in the abstract.
The type of methods they used include surveys, interviews,
and literature reviews. These kinds of studies were nearly
exclusively conducted by academic, non-profit, or government
authors—for example, guidance from government agencies
such as NIST’s AI Risk Management Framework [72].
Many meta-commentary papers aimed to develop a method
ology and many considered the development of rigorous
audit methods as a vital contribution. Audit methods these
studies put forward include both qualitative and quantitative
approaches. These studies also examine audit practitioners
themselves, interrogating norms around algorithm evaluation
and audit practice. The harms at issue tend to be less well
specified; most mention some form of independence, fairness,
privacy, or recourse. These studies rarely mention affected
stakeholders in method design. Similarly, a couple of tool
development papers developed standardised tools, usually
quantitative, for auditing or for algorithmic recourse.
B. Impact by audit type
1) Product/model/algorithm audits: We found few audit
studies that acknowledge and address power asymmetries.
Many prominent papers we surveyed are collaborations be
tween authors from academic institutions and large tech corpo
rations, usually examining their own systems and datasets, and
rarely explicitly calling for systemic change, auditing systems,
often without involvement from affected stakeholders. Unlike
audit work by journalists and civil society, academic audit
work tends to follow academic norms where the objective
is academic publication. Subsequently, more often than not,
audits are seen as an academic, intellectual exercise than
practices directly linked to real world consequences. Audit
findings are rarely presented with demands for concrete sys
temic change. This does not, however, mean that academic
audits are not impactful. To the contrary, seminal audit case
studies such as Gender Shades [41] have not only resulted
in meaningful improvements to deployed systems [36] but
also have come to establish algorithmic audits as a field
of enquiry. The impact of such work is, however, rarely
obvious at the time of publication but becomes apparent
gradually over time. For industry collaborations, the audits
may result in organisational reform. For example, case studies
co-authored by authors with big tech affiliations such as [73]
may have contributed to tightening Google Play Store app
data access restrictions [74]. Generally, academic audit results
that publicly call out audit targets [36], that tend to be picked
up by news outlets such as MIT Tech Review, activists, and
regulators tend to bring about the most observable changes.
2) Data audits: The impact of data audits are also often
unclear, though prominent data audits sometimes resulted in
changes to benchmarks — an audit of 80 Million Tiny Images,
for example, resulted in the withdrawal [75] of the dataset [60]
and a Financial Times investigation of Microsoft’s dataset of
“celebrity” faces even resulted in its discontinuation [76, 77].
3) Ecosystem audits: Ecosystem audits often reveal com
prehensive institutional or legislative policy demands in ad
vocacy. This includes, connecting performance and privacy
concerns involved in facial recognition use by law en
forcement [68], breaking down sources of bias throughout
the model development cycle [78], systematic environmental
costs [79, 80] or the labor issues across the entire supply chain
of AI development [81].
4) Meta-commentary & Critique: Although the immediate
impact is directly quantifiable, meta-commentaries provide
important mechanisms that allow audit studies and practices
to zoom out, self-reflect, and evaluate the overall picture and
direction, all of which is a crucial element for grounding audits
in concrete foundations and optimal accountability.
More specifically, a certain type of meta-commentary that
seems to be of particular importance are critique studies. This
category of work engages in reflexive commentary critiques
of auditing as a practice. A few pieces of critical work
interrogate the effectiveness, shortcomings, and limitations
of audits. Such work highlights structural issues such as
historical power asymmetries that might be reinforced by
common academic auditing practices, or how audits might
serve as a smoke-screen for corporate responsibility, such as,
audit washing [82, 83] or how audits might lead to simplis
tic technological solutionism [84]. They draw on qualitative
interviews, literature reviews, and statistical analysis. Like
meta-commentaries, the impacts of these works are not easily
measured, though many of these studies are highly cited.
V. RESULTS: AUDITING OUTSIDE ACADEMIA
In this section, we review a sample of audits and audit prac
tices from outside academia — law firms, consulting agencies
and corporate audits, journalism, civil society, government,
and civil society — examining how factors such as institutional
context affects the practice of auditing and accountability.
These auditors operate in a variety of domains and deploy
various methods throughout the audit design, development,
and execution process. For each domain, we pay particular
attention to the details of the audit context and methodology,
then connect this to the observed impact derived from audits
for that particular domain. Our analysis criteria and results
are summarised in Table II (The full list of documents we
analysed is found in Appendix A).
TABLEII
SUMMARYOFANALYSISACROSSAIAUDITINGDOMAINS.
Domain Context Methods Impacts Motivation Target TypesofHarms Inst.Context
ACADEMIA Accountability,
make policy,
establishstandards
ADS, online
platforms,
training
datasets, audit
practitioners
Functionality failures,
disparateimpact,privacy
harms, stereotyping,
manipulation, ethics
washing,unfairness
Academic,non-profit,&
corp. authors studying
systems built by same,
occasionally involving
stakeholders
interview,survey,
simulation,quant
&qualeval, the
ory, lit review,
framework devt,
ablation
Often unclear;
media coverage;
occasionally,
reforms to target
systems
CIVIL SO
CIETY
Accountability, ad
vocacy, make pol
icy
ADS, online
platforms,
surveillance
tech, biometric
datause
Fair use harms, privacy
harms, censorship, dis
parateimpact,HRviola
tions, deceptive claims,
hatespeech
Non-profit,independents
usually advocating on
behalf of harmedstake
holders
Activism,
interviews, visu
alisation/media,
forensics, public
recordsrequests
Civil suits won,
media coverage,
moratoriums,
abolition
JOURNALISM Accountability Online
platforms, large
tech companies,
ADS (public
services)
disparate impact, fraud,
non-compliance,privacy
harms,culturalgenocide
Targets mostly tech
firms&gov’t agencies
on behalf of /in
consultation with
public; funded by
foundt’ns/privatedonors
Investigative
reporting, quant.
eval., interviews,
data donation,
scraping, docs
review
Regulatory
action, civil
suits, reforms to
target systems,
inspiration for
research
GOVERNMENTEnforce
regulations,
establishstandards
Datasharingand
management;
surveillance
tech,ADS
Non-compliance,
privacy harms, racial
disparities, physical
safety, functionality
Targets companies and
gov’t agencies; may or
may not have enforce
mentauthority
Interviews, test
ing, docs review,
quant. eval.
Monetary
penalties,
standard-setting
CORPORATE
AUDIT
REPORTS
Identify ethical is
sues
Internal APIs,
platforms
Humanrights“impacts”,
racial injustice, voter
suppression,hatespeech
“Voluntary”reforms,of
ten at request of & in
consultationwith exter
nal stakeholders
Stakeholder/expert
consultation,
interviews
Reforms to
practices,
commitments
tofuturechanges
LAWFIRMS Compliance,
impact assessment
(BNH.AI, AWO);
accountability
(Foxglove)
Public services,
onlineplatforms,
gig platforms,
other private
companies
Non-compliance,
injustice/disparate
impact, privacy
harms, safety, digital
manipulation
For-profits and public
services (BNH.AI,
AWO); consulting for
harmed stakeholders
(Foxglove)
Testimony, docs
review, policy
development,
legal research
Reform,revision,
abolition, forced
disclosure of
secret contracts,
(Foxglove)
CONSULTING
AGENCIES
Compliance,
impact assessment,
mitigate
financial/PRrisk
ADS, online
platforms, gig
work platforms,
surveillancetech
Noncompliance,
disparate impact, non
functionality, privacy
harms, security, risk
Consultingfor for-profit
audit targets;may con
sult stakeholders (Babl
AI)
Assessment
frameworks,
docs review,
data governance
planning
Set precedent
for policy
(ORCAA);
otherwise not
clearorunstated
ADS:automateddecisionsystems.
A. LawFirms
There isa large industrydevotedtodatagovernance legal
services,butfirmsofferinglegal services forAIauditingare
lesscommon.Threesuchmergingboutiquelawfirmsare:Lu
minos.Law[85](formerlycalledBHN.AI),Foxglove[86],and
AWO[87].Thesefirms represent threedifferent institutional
arrangements inaudit-relatedlegal services.
a)Context:Lawfirmsoperateasbothinternalandexter
nalauditors.Theycanbehiredbytheaudit target toconduct
aninternal assessment aspartofaregulatoryrequirementor
inlegaldefense.Lawfirmsalsoworkwithrepresentativesof
impactedpopulations(oftenprobono)toexternallyinvestigate
anaudit target tocollectmaterial evidenceof perceivedor
reported harms. Both scenarios are typically prompted by
individualorcollectivecomplaintspost-deployment.
The organisational structure, businessmodel, and subse
quent selectionofclienteledetermines thegeneralobjectives
for these threeorganisations.Foxglove—anon-profit organi
sationadvocatingfor the least empowered—aims toholdAI
operators to account, aspiring to “stand up to tech giants
andgovernments” and “make tech fair for everyone” [86].
Accordingly, themainaudit target forFoxgloveincludesdata
practicesofsocialmediaplatforms,governmental institutions,
as well as theworking conditions of content moderators,
warehouseworkers, andgigworkers.
Luminos.LawandAWO—bothfor-profitfirms—offercom
plianceandpublicpolicyservices.Theycarryoutauditwork
at the behest of their clients, with the goal of ensuring
compliancewith standards, data rights, data protectiondue
diligence, and regulatory obligations. Luminos.Law’s client
testimonials feature Fortune 100&500 tech firms [88];
AWO’s “commercial practice is balancedwithgiving those
less-resourcedavoice”,accordingtothefirm,andtheirclient
testimonials featuremany non-profit and university clients
[89].Thetypeofharmandconcernsthatunderliethesefirms’
servicesvaryaccordingly.ForLuminos.Law, theseareassess
ment andassurance around legal compliance, legal defence
and liability [90]. Similarly, AWOfocuses on auditing for
privacy and data rights, safety, surveillance violations, digital
manipulation and exploitation [89, 91]. The types of harm
and concerns that drive audit practice for Foxglove, on the
other hand, include violations of justice, disparate performance
[92, 93], and specific breaches of data governance law [94, 95].
We see a stark difference in power asymmetries amongst
these three organisations. As for profit forms, both Lumi
nos.Law and AWO’s objectives, missions, and practices are
shaped by their business models that prioritise the needs of
their clients, which are often wealthy and powerful corpora
tions. Foxglove’s work directly or indirectly pushes to shift
power from the most to the least powerful. Subsequently,
Foxglove frequently works with groups such as content mod
erators, warehouse workers and gig-workers, groups that are
often underpaid, over-exploited, and disfranchised.
b) Methodology: Foxglove’s cases often involve specific
campaigns, petitions, and/or case studies. Foxglove uses meth
ods such as legal compliance analysis, interviewing, and anec
dotal evidence, or leans on previous research to diagnose and
highlight harms, concerns, and to pursue legal challenges. Both
Luminos.Law and AWO work within the needs of their clients,
which include big tech companies and start-ups. Within such a
context, the main audit target for Luminos.Law are models and
data, while audit target include social media platforms [96] and
hiring algorithms [97], based on media coverage of the firm
[85]. AWO similarly carries out documentation analysis, legal
compliance analysis, and policy development using previous
research as a basis [91].
c) Impact: As firms that provide audits as a service
to clients, some details of their practices are inaccessible—
particularly for Luminos.Law—because much of their work is
explicitly marketed as “privileged and confidential” [88]. In
formation on the impacts of their commercial work is therefore
difficult to identify. AWO’s blog, for example, mostly features
work done in collaboration with civil society organizations like
the Ada Lovelace Institute [98]. Luminos’s public portfolio
includes some standards guidance, a bias calculator for New
York’s new audit law [99, 100], and an audit of the open
source large language model RoBERTa [101, 102], but the
impacts of these audits on practice are not evident.
Foxglove’s work, on the other hand, often results in sig
nificant impactful changes including the reversal of Ofqual’s
A level grading algorithm [103], halting the use of visa
streaming algorithm that was deployed by the UK Home
Office [104], and forcing disclosure of a secrete contracts
between corporations and the UK government; for example,
the “NHS Covid-19 data deals” [105] and exposing contracts
between Palantir and the UK government.
B. Consulting Agencies & Corporate Audits
Other organizations offer audit services beyond legal and
policy advice. A crop of recent startups, such as, Arthur AI
and Fiddler AI, offer model monitoring services with fairness
and privacy components. Others offer consulting specifically,
auditing as a service, including boutiques such as, Parity
Consulting [106] as well as large consulting firms such as
Deloitte [107], McKinsey [108], and Accenture [109].
Because the product-specific work stemming from an inter
nal audit team is rarely published, corporations occasionally
publish a report in conjunction with an external consulting
agency. For example, Business for Social Responsibility (BSR)
has conducted audits on behalf of Google for its celebrity
facial recognition system [110], and Facebook regarding its
human rights impact in Myanmar [111]. At times these con
sulting agencies are also part of a regulatory process. For
example, the management consulting firm called Guidehouse
Inc. played the role of an “independent third-party reviewer”
in the Department of Justice (in the US) settlement with
Facebook regarding bias in its advertising [112].
Here, we examine three consulting agencies that have been
involved with prominent audit case studies: ORCAA [113],
Eticas [114], and BABL AI [115].
a) Context: All three agencies provide internal audits as
a service with the main objective of algorithmic accountability,
and engage primarily in case-by-case consulting with private
and public sector clients such as HireVue, Airbnb, Proctorio
[115], the states of Illinois and Colorado [113], the Allegheny
County Health Department [114], the cities of Barcelona [114]
and Amsterdam [113], and the University of Iowa [115].
Within the bounds of client-agency agreement, the main audit
targets for these agencies include social media platforms (such
as TikTok and YouTube), ADS, FRT, ride hailing apps (such
as Uber, Cabify, Bolt), predictive scoring systems, hiring algo
rithms, and healthcare algorithms [113, 114, 116]. Typically,
the audits are ex post, though some can also be completed
pre-deployment (e.g. BSR celebrity facial recognition audit
was conducted before model release). ORCAA and Eticas also
undertake some internal audit methodology development work.
ORCAA conducts audits in order to assess regulatory com
pliance, performance testing, as well as to measure and mit
igate disparate performance [113]. BABL AI conducts audits
for bias, risk, and impact assessment [116]. Like Luminos,
ORCAA and BABL AI, both offer services to help companies
comply legal requirements, for example, in the US, the New
York Local Law 144 [100], which requires annual audits of AI
hiring tools. Eticas similarly conducts audits to ensure security
and data protection and to assess issues such as fairness,
bias, and model accuracy [114]. The type of concerns and
harms these consulting agencies mention in public materials
vary. ORCAA, for example, mainly focuses on measuring
bias—such as discrimination, race, and gender—and assessing
for regulatory compliance [113]. Eticas mainly focuses on
assessing algorithmic systems, for example, for functionality
and detecting unfair practices towards protected groups [114].
Similarly, the main types of harm BABL AI focuses on include
bias, fairness, transparency as well as assessment for standards
and privacy compliance [115].
It is difficult to asses how these three consulting agencies
might shift power with clarity. However, they target discrimi
nation, fairness, and gender and ethnicity disparities and aspire
to lofty goals—BABL AI, for example, seeks to “prioritize
human flourishing” [115]. But, like the legal consulting firms,
these audits are subordinate to client needs, and those clients
include large corporations, startups, and government bodies.
Ultimately, these audits primarily serve those entities—for
example, by protecting clients from concerns such as organi
sational and reputational crisis —and help clients build trust
with stakeholders [114, 115, 117].
b) Methodology: We have sparse information on audit
methodologies used within these agencies. From the infor
mation we can gather on their web-pages, these agencies
sometimes develop internal audit tools. ORCAA, for example
uses “Ethical Matrix Framework” [113], while BABL AI has
developed a set of criteria that can be used to conduct bias
testing in their “process audit” [116]. Other methods include
reviewing documents, interacting with stakeholders, and ethics
due diligence vetting, the details of which are not provided.
c) Impact: The impact of these types of audits, more
particularly impact as a direct consequence of these three
agencies, is not clear, particularly, with Eticas and BABL
AI. ORCAA’s work has seen some impact (albeit as an
indirect influence) on policy on the US White House AI Ethics
Blueprint [118]. ORCAA also conducted an audit of HireVue’s
early career and campus hire assessment tools [117, 119].
HireVue subsequently declared its intention to make changes
to its practices (but only following a formal complaint from the
Electronic Privacy Information Center to the U.S. FTC [120]),
including halting the use of facial analysis in its tools, but
received criticism for misrepresenting ORCAA’s analysis and
not taking bolder steps [119]. HireVue also commissioned the
audit and defined both the scope of evaluation and the extent
of its impact—a problem of independence raised frequently in
prior work [12, 119, 83, 25].
C. Journalism
Journalists have a long history of investigating and reporting
on AI systems [121]. Investigative journalists at the Wall Street
Journal, the New York Times, the MIT Technology Review,
and many other outlets have unearthed concrete examples of
systematic AI harms [122, 123, 124, 125, 126].
We examined work from two of the most prominent outlets
that have conducted extensive AI audits: ProPublica and The
Markup. ProPublica [127] carried out a foundational investiga
tion into criminal risk assessment in 2016, that has set prece
dence for the field of AI auditing [37]. The Markup [128] is a
relatively newer outlet focused on data-driven investigations.
a) Context: Audits from both The Markup and ProPub
lica tend to be external focusing on specific types of targets.
These include, AI systems that are commonly used by large
corporations or social media platforms for advertising, hiring,
and ranking; government ADS, or public programs with digital
sites; as well as content moderation systems and related labor
conditions. Both organisations carry out audits with the stated
objective of accountability. The Markup’s slogan reads, “Big
Tech is watching you. We’re watching big tech” [128]. The
type of harms and concerns both organisations investigate,
surface, diagnose, and evaluate include disparities in perfor
mance (for instance, along the dimensions of gender, race,
ethnicity, age), injustice, discrimination, privacy violations,
fraud, and legal compliance breaches. As harm discovery
happens through publicly submitted journalistic “tips”, the
audits are typically ex-post.
b) Methodology: Both Propublica and The Markup
utilise quantitative statistical analysis in addition to inves
tigative reporting, interviews, and document analysis. The
Markup’s investigation of Amazon’s product ranking system,
for example, involved training a model to predict where
products would appear based on various factors [129]. Com
pared to other domains, these outlets engage in an extensive
amount of data collection using a variety of custom scraping,
data donation, and analysis tools, often built in-house. The
Markup’s Citizen Browser project, for example, used data
donations to investigate discriminatory targeted advertising
[130, 131, 132] on Facebook [133].
c) Impact: Of the various domains we have examined,
journalistic audits result in the most impactful outcomes.
Audits carried out both by The Markup and ProPublica have
resulted in subsequent changes in numerous domains including
shifting the audit discourse in academia, altering practices in
industry (including big tech corporations such as Facebook,
Amazon, and Google) [134], and inspiring activism [135].
Audits both from both outlets have also directly inspired leg
islative and regulatory action [136, 137], including a settlement
in which the U.S. Department of Justice required Facebook to
stop using a special audience tool for housing ads [138, 139].
Those actions included abolishing deployed tools—such as an
algorithm governing liver transplants that favored rich, urban
patients [140, 141]. ProPublica’s audit of COMPAS set the
precedent for algorithmic auditing and remains a canonical
work not only for academic research but also as a prime
example of algorithmic audit [37].
D. Civil society
Activist and other civil society organisations—such as the
Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), Data & So
ciety, and the AI Now Institute—conduct algorithm audits
studies as part of their work. We examined work from six
prominent organisations: the Electronic Frontier Foundation
(EFF) [142], Refugee Law Lab (RLL) [143], The Citizen
Lab [144], Migration Tech Monitor (MTM) [145], the Ada
Lovelace Institute [146] and the American Civil Liberties
Union (ACLU) [147].
a) Context: These organisations and institutions primar
ily conduct case studies, while the Ada Lovelace Institute in
particular, also conducts meta-commentary work, especially on
audit methods. Though the audits are consistently external,
the harms and concerns these civil society audits aim to
surface, diagnose, and mitigate vary. Diagnosing and miti
gating security vulnerabilities, spying technology, and illegal
surveillance are some of the main focuses for EFF. Similarly,
the Citizen Lab audits are driven by overarching goals such
as investigating and exposing security vulnerabilities and de
fending free speech online [144]. RLL and MTM primarily
focus on investigative and advocacy work around the questions
of transparency and the impacts of technology on refugees
[148, 143]. MTM particularly aims to document, map, and
monitor migration technology and dismantle and destabilise
hierarchical power structures [148]. Audits at Ada Lovelace
Institute are often driven by the objective of policy change
with the primary focus of diagnosis and remedy for concerns
such as privacy, transparency, participation, and disparate
impact. Accountability through legal action, litigation, and
legal objectives are central to ACLU.
The audits we examined target mostly ADS in govern
ment services, online platforms, and—more than any other
domain—surveillance tech. RLL in particular targets tech
nology such as lie detectors and border patrolling drones
[143]. The Citizen Lab focuses on surveillance and biometric
technologies (e.g. for facial recognition), hardware (such as
phones and other devices used by politicians and activists),
apps, and code [144]. Biometric data, digital ID systems,
surveillance drones, facial recognition, iris scan data, algorith
mic motion detectors, ankle monitors, GPS tags, AI powered
satellites as well as border surveillance vendors themselves are
the central audit targets for MTM [145]. The Ada Lovelace
Institute also has a diverse target of audit, with a general
focus on biometric data and healthcare in particular [146]. The
ACLU similarly targets facial recognition technology, medical
algorithms, welfare algorithms, insurance pricing algorithms,
and redlining algorithms as well as advertising algorithms on
platforms such as Facebook [147].
b) Methodology: Civil society audits utilize the most
diverse audit methods. EFF, for example, uses policy analysis,
grass-root activism, and technology development. Some of the
methods used by RLL include interviews with refugees, film
making, data collection (from the Immigration and refugee
board through Access to Information request, for instance) and
analysis, interactive visualisation of data, and documentation
of issues such as deportation and refused refugee claims.
The Citizen Lab audit methods include in-house developed
tools, interviews, and forensic analysis of devices. Similar to
RLL, MTM also uses methods such as interviews with people
crossing borders, photography, investigative analysis, as well
as documenting and archiving migration tech. The main audit
methods for Ada Lovelace Institute are participatory methods,
including opinion polling, as well as policy research and devel
opment. The ACLU often uses quantitative evaluation of, for
example operational systems, analysis of data acquired through
privileged access, public record requests, and scraping.
c) Impact: Similar to journalistic investigations, civil
society audits often result in significant impact, often through
legal action. These include nuanced and difficult to measure
impacts such as shifting public attitude towards surveillance
technology or drawing public and media attention towards
harmful or controversial tech, as well as more concrete
outcomes such as moratoriums and abolition. The EFF, for
example, won a student’s civil lawsuit against the exam
surveillance company Proctorio [149]. In K.W. v. Armstrong,
the ACLU obtained an injunction stopping algorithmically
determined welfare cuts targeting individuals with develop
mental disabilities in Idaho [150]. Civil society organisations
often represent those harmed by AI systems and in doing so,
shift power from the most to the least powerful.
E. Government
Several government agencies, especially in Europe, have
begun to engage in AI audits. The EU’s recent Digital Services
Act and an AI hiring bill passed in New York City [100],
for example, both require some form independent audit. We
looked at two government organizations, one with an initially
prominent role in AI auditing in the UK, the Information Com
missioner’s Office (ICO) [151], and another in the U.S., the
National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) [152].
a) Context: ICO conducts audits with the broader ob
jective of upholding information rights and enforcing legal
requirements [153, 154]. NIST, on the other hand, is primarily
focused on establishing standards and best practice principles
for ensuring the development and deployment of socially
responsible algorithmic systems [155, 154]. ICO conducts
audits on a case by case basis, often published as a report.
Comparatively, NIST tends to produce meta-commentary on
audits. The central goal for engaging in audit practices for
ICO is primarily to investigate and enforce regulations, while
NIST lacks such authoritative power and is mainly focused on
establishing standards.
The type of audits regulators carry out tend to be procedural
rather than substantive. Audits are carried out with specific ob
jectives which often involve ensuring that a given organisation,
institution or corporation is in compliance with established
standards or legal requirements. While some organisations like
ICO, for example, have the authority to assess and enforce
regulatory compliance, others, organisations like NIST, focus
on establishing best practice standards and principles that
tech developers and vendors are only encouraged to follow.
Guidelines from both ICO [154] and NIST [156] tend to apply
to informing and standardizing practice amongst internal
audit actors. As these guidelines explicitly mention model
development interventions such as fairness or explainability
mitigation strategies, it is implied that they apply to ex ante
and in media res audits, as well as ex post audits.
The main audit targets for ICO are data governance prac
tices within public and private companies, public authorities,
and government departments, especially those considered to
have major impacts [157, 154]. Organisation can request to
be audited but also the ICO audits organisations that the
Commissioner believes require audits, that is organisations
and corporations with major impacts on society. The ICO
audits are a mechanism to check for compliance with data
protection legislation, how personal data is managed, data
sharing agreements with third parties, and security measures,
amongst other things. NIST, on the other hand, focuses on
artefacts such as facial recognition technology and “general”
AI as the main target for audit with the aim of assessing
harms such as racial disparities, basic functionality, privacy
harms, as well as physical safety of these systems [158, 159].
To the degree that government actors participate in the audit
process themselves, they tend to execute external ex-post
audits, separate from formal corporate participation.
b) Methodology: The ICO has developed a set of def
initions of what an audit consists of as well as setting out
mechanisms for assessing compliance in accordance with
regulations based on four assurance ratings: high, reasonable,
limited, and very limited assurance. Following an audit, ICO
makes recommendations on how to improve on the audit
result. The main method used to conduct audits for ICO
include examining documents, testing, and interviews with key
personnel [154]. For NIST, the main audit methods include
data trust, accuracy evaluation, and benchmarking [155, 160].
c) Impact: ICO has issued several monetary penalties for
data protection legislation breaches, including a fine of £12.7
million to TikTok for misusing children’s data [153] and £17
million fine to Clearview AI inc [161], in addition to issuing a
notice to stop further processing of the personal data of people
in the UK and a request to delete such data. NIST has made
significant impact in the U.S. regulatory conversation with its
AI Risk Management Framework (RMF), though it has not
conducted any audits with specific impacts and has no power
to enforce these guidelines [72].
VI. DISCUSSION
While many of the academic studies we reviewed formed
the foundation for important methods and topics for AI au
diting, they also often lacked in achieving comparable levels
of impact to the audit work we analyzed in journalism, civil
society, government, and industry. In this section, we outline
several practical takeaways from our analysis for researchers,
policymakers, and practitioners. In particular, we identify
several ways that audit work outside academia could serve
as a guide for more impactful audit studies within academia:
first, by expanding the aims of audit work beyond evaluation,
and towards accountability; second, by encouraging more
explicit and forward-looking engagement with often excluded
stakeholders, acknowledging power asymmetries [62], and
fostering mechanisms for collective action and ecological
change; and third, by offering specific improvements for audit
methodology, including specificity, practitioner diversity, and
interdisciplinary collaboration.
1) Power asymmetries & auditor-stakeholder relation
ships: One of the most influential factors in determining an
audit’s impact was revealed in the power analysis of how
the auditors interacted with various stakeholders—including
impacted populations, the audit target and others. Subse
quently, methodological innovation and evaluation of AI sys
tems without considerations of structural factors—such as the
uneven distribution of power, control, benefit and harm—
is unlikely to result in significant impact. Future research
could further explore tools and strategies to map out, define
and foster auditor relationships with various stakeholders.
Similarly, policy-makers and other authorities could step in to
empower auditors– for example, by incorporating audit results
into more consequential repercussions for companies or open
sourcing, publishing, disseminating, and reviewing submitted
audit results.
2) Prioritizing audit execution stages beyond evaluation:
Framing details such as the selection of audit targets, named
motivations, types of harms investigated and the scope of audit
goals are more likely to determine the effectiveness of an
audit’s outcome than the details of audit execution. Most of
the academic work we reviewed focused on the process of
evaluating AI systems for bias, fairness, or disparate impacts.
Conversely, these studies rarely focused on other stages of au
diting crucial to accountability in non-academic work, such as
discovering harms, communicating audit results, or organizing
non-technical interventions and collective action. As detailed
in Section V, these factors are critical in influencing audit
success outside of the auditor’s control [12, 25]. For example,
some auditors, such as regulators and law firms, have the legal
authority to demand access. Meanwhile, for others, this degree
of internal visibility is rare, requiring the auditors to rely on
proxy evaluations and open up their audit results to critique,
denial and retaliation from the audit targets.
Even as policymakers work to install legal protections for
external auditors and direct resources towards harms discovery
and audit reporting, future research should investigate the
under-studied aspects of the AI auditing process and prac
titioners should prioritize these aspects of auditing in addition
to evaluation.
3) Expanding audit scope beyond the product, model
or algorithm: In our survey, we use the ecosystem audit
classification to describe studies that consider the entire AI
pipeline in a holistic way— communities and socio-technical
environments (digital or physical) defining or impacted by
critical components to an AI system’s operation— (§IV-A).
While these ecosystem audits exemplify many of the elements
of the socio-technical auditing advocated for in various aca
demic critiques [82, 68, 162], most academic audit studies we
found extremely rarely involved a comprehensive analysis of
involved stakeholders and any holistic view of multiple inter
acting AI systems. Future work should continue to incorporate
and expand broader and holistic perspectives in order to craft
a richer account of algorithmic systems and their impacts.
4) Impact increases with specificity: Even as audit studies
broaden their scope to include the ecosystem surrounding and
defining an AI system, most audits need to be specific in order
to be more impactful. As has been previously discussed in the
aftermath of the Gender Shades audit Raji and Buolamwini
[36], naming a specific audit target, advocacy objectives and
intended target responses ensures that the audit speaks to more
specific demands from the audit target. This makes that target
more likely to to respond to the audit and informs advocates on
precise policy demands. This strategy was seen in many civic
audits, such as the ACLU, the Markup and regulators like ICO,
where the scope and demands tied to their investigations are
specific. When audit scope was too diffused, the audit seemed
to hold less effectiveness for accountability. ORCAA’s Hirevue
audit, for example, was criticized for being too high level to
inform any specific allegations or demands for remedy [119].
Constraining audit objectives and scope has benefits as well
as limitations. Too narrow a scope may obfuscate broader
systematic factors and make it even more difficult to advocate
for more structural changes beyond the scope of the examined
audit target [163, 36]. Therefore, future work should aim to be
highly specific without losing focus on holistic and ecological
observations.
5) Utilising a wider range of audit methodologies:
Within CS and CS-adjacent academic venues, quantitative
methodological approaches to AI auditing were often front and
center. These methods are evident in the range of fairness met
rics developed and debated within these communities [164].
Existing critiques already articulate the limitations of these
approaches, in terms of its abstraction [165], legal incom
patibilities [166, 167] and lack of connection to substantive
outcomes [168]. It is particularly noteworthy that in many non
academic domains, the methods employed are far from what
is being explored or commonly discussed in academia, in
cluding a range of qualitative methodological approaches such
as investigative reporting, document review, and stakeholder
consultation. Granted, these other institutions often possess
different skill sets and operate within different constraints.
However, especially for academics hoping to connect their
work to the practice of other audit practitioner communities,
future AI audit research should explore how extra-disciplinary
methods and tactics like these—especially those with a proven
record of impact—could bolster academic audit work.
6) Appreciating the diversity of audit practitioners:
Different audit communities possess different strengths and
weaknesses—civil society auditors, for example, typically
have mature and well-developed methods around audit com
munication and advocacy, but at times may lack the technical
capacity to execute more complex quantitative analyses. On
the other hand, in academia, auditors might be well-equipped
for innovating technically but struggled with public and other
stakeholder engagement.
Our survey supports prior findings [25] that audit prac
titioners within a given domain are not a monolith. For
instance, there are law firms that provide audits as a service
on behalf of audit targets while others execute civic audits
on behalf of, and in collaboration with impacted populations.
Similarly, we found a wide range of technical competence
within domains. Audits from the journalism organization the
Markup, for instance, were often more thorough and repro
ducible than some academic studies. Similarly, auditors can
have differing motivations and goals, which deeply informs
their practice [169].
Future research on the practice of AI auditing should still
consider the strengths and weaknesses of different auditing
institutions. These findings are informative not only for im
proving audit practice but also 1) facilitating avenues for
collaboration with auditors outside academia and 2) informing
a growing set of enacted and proposed legislation requiring
audits for AI systems [100, 170, 171, 172, 173].
7) Timing and auditor type are not the primary deter
mining factors of audit impact: The distinction of when
the audit should ideally be conducted (i.e. ex ante, in media
res, ex post) has recently been the subject of some policy
debate [174, 175]. As expected, those with increased access
(i.e. internal auditors) typically have the opportunity to execute
audits pre-deployment, while others (i.e. external auditors)
are often restricted to conducting audits post-deployment.
However, when it comes to translating audit results to ac
countability, both scenarios come with distinct challenges and
it seems that other contextual factors outside of auditor type
or timing, including audit goal, target, design, communication
and scope, can ultimately be much more meaningful.
For example, despite increased and early access, internal au
ditors may still struggle to convince key organizational stake
holders to act on audit results [176, 177, 178]. Furthermore,
such auditors can become vulnerable to internal corporate
retaliation, and corporate censorship [179] as well as being
mired in conflict of interest [180]. All of this can interfere
with the auditors’ ability to externally communicate results, or
force auditors to scope results too narrowly to be meaningfully.
In policy, internal auditors are typically those designated to
carry out mandatory corporate audit requirements (e.g. the
“independent auditors” in Article 37 of the Digital Services
Act). The particular challenges of internal auditors indicate
that requirements for external reporting, product standards and
auditor conduct standards are especially important in such
contexts.
On the other hand, external auditors are free to set their
scope and communicate results publicly. However, they typ
ically face issues around external legitimacy and visibility
that can make them easy to ignore completely [36]. The
serious issues they face around auditor capacity and infor
mation access are further hindrances to audit quality and thus
impact [12], and the public-facing nature of their advocacy
makes them even more vulnerable to corporate retaliation.
External auditors are typically designated as voluntary “in
vestigators” or “researchers”, rather than actual auditors (e.g.
“vetted researchers” in Article 40 of the Digital Services
Act), and are often mentioned in data access or safe harbor
clauses, revealing the importance of such policy interventions
in addressing their particular challenges.
8) Recognizing the limits of audits: Some societal impacts
of AI are not amenable to audits. What can be evaluated and
audited depends on numerous factors including normative and
pragmatic considerations as well as what is prioritised and
anticipated, and whether harms and risks are known or antic
ipated [181]. As there are several serious, although gradual,
and pernicious harms emanating from AI– for instance, the
chilling effect of surveillance, or corporate power concentra
tion [182]– it is clear that not all pressing issues regarding
the technology can be addressed with audits. Although the
ecological audits we have introduced in this work are an
encouraging first step towards significant structural change
in some of these cases, other, likely moral or rights-based
arguments are required for this kind of advocacy. Thus, it is
clear that audits are just one element of a necessarily broader
set of AI accountability strategies. We caution against any
approaches that treat audits as any kind of all-encompassing
solution to technological ills.
VII. CONCLUSION
Audits have become widely popular in the AI field as an
aspirational accountability measure to inform our decision
making and regulation of AI deployments. However, lessons
from the broader range of AI audit practitioners beyond
academia reveal that there is still much to learn in order for
these audit studies to operate as consequential judgements.
Future work will hopefully continue to investigate this rela
tionship between contextual factors, audit design, audit exe
cution and the underlying shared vision of audit practitioners
across all domains: a substantively meaningful path towards
AI accountability.

References:

...

PPENDIX A
METHODS: SEARCHING IN NON-ACADEMIC DOMAINS
To produce the analysis in §V, we analyzed reports, press
releases, publications, blogs, and web postings from multiple
institutions outside of academia. Here, we describe in more
detail the specific search methods used to produce our analysis
for each institution. (The full list of academic audit studies
we found can be accessed at github.com/ryansteed/academic
audits.)
A. Regulators
1) National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST):
We reviewed documents (N = 16) from two programs: NIST’s
Trustworthy & Responsible AI Resource Center (airc.nist.gov)
and NIST’s Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT) program
[183]. From the Resource Center, we reviewed the NIST
AI Risk Management Framework (RMF) [72] (as well as
the accompanying Playbook and Roadmap) and the N = 5
special publications and internal reports in the RMF Knowl
edge Base [155]. From the FRVT program, we reviewed the
executive summary of all the pages linked under sections
with titles pre-pended “FRVT” (N = 8) on the FRVT page
[184, 185, 186, 187, 183], including the homepages for FRVT
2000, 2002, 2006, and 2013, as well as NIST Interagency
Reports (NISTIR) 8331, 8280, 7709, and 7830. NISTIR 8280
in particular describes analyses of demographic differences
across a large number of algorithms, developers, and test
images [158].
2) Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO): The ICO
details audit information on its website ico.org.uk, including
definition of audit, assurance ratings, audit target, as well as
audit reports. We reviewed the “Audits and overview reports”
section yielding 48 results in total.
B. Law Firms
1) AWO: We reviewed publicly available pages on AWO’s
website (awo.agency), particularly the descriptions of their
services at awo.agency/services. We also reviewed all the posts
on their blog up to July 2023 (N = 62), only a few of which
were related to AWO’s audit work (AWO [188], for example).
2) Foxglove: In order to extract relevant information on
the organization, we reviewed the website, mainly the Who
We Are and News sections.
3) Luminos.Law: Our information on Luminos.Law—
called BHN.AI at the time of our study—is sourced from
the firm’s website, and more particularly, in the AI Audits
section.
C. Civil Society
1) Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF): We looked at
the About page to extract general information on the Foun
dation. We also reviewed the Our Work, and Tools page in
order to extract detailed information on including Methods
and Tools.
2) Refugee Law Laboratory (RLL): The Refugee Law Lab
website About page provided the initial general information.
For reports, datasets, data visualizations, and impact, we
reviewed the Projects and News and Recent Publications
sections.
3) The Citizen Lab: The About the Citizen Lab pro
vided general information about this group. In order to ex
tract detailed relevant information, we reviewed the Research
and News pages.
4) Migration and Tech Monitor (MTM): We started our
survey with the Home page of MTM’s website. The Method
ology section details the methods used by the organization,
the Resources page lists various case studies carried out by
the organization, and the Snapshots section presents numerous
pictorial evidence supporting the organization’s work.
5) Ada Lovelace Institute: We surveyed the “Projects”
listed at adalovelaceinstitute.org/our-work, selecting only those
related to AI auditing. We followed any reports listed in those
project overviews. In particular, we analyzed the executive
summary of N = 4 reports on algorithmic impact assessments
in healthcare [189], tools and methods for assessing algorith
mic systems [23, 24], and auditing standards [190]. We also
surveyed N = 47 blog posts published July 2023 or earlier
at adalovelaceinstitute.org/blog, filtering for the programmes
“Biometrics”, “Enabling a responsible AI ecosystem”, “Ethics
and accountability in practice”, and “Public-sector use of data
& algorithms”. We considered only blog posts that discussed
the Institute’s own AI auditing work.
6) The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU): The
ACLU publishes details about its work on its website aclu.org,
including news, publications and reports. We reviewed all doc
uments labelled as “reports and other assets” published 2018
2022 (N = 70), using aclu.org/search. Most of these did not
relate to AI, so we also used Google to search aclu.org/news
using the keywords from our academic search as well as
other keywords such as “algorithm”, “machine learning”,
and “automated decision” (e.g., site:aclu.org/news
after:2017 ‘‘algorithm’’).
D. Journalism
1) Propublica: We initially scraped the ProPublica website
using the keyword “audit”. However, this did not yield fruitful
as significant number of articles that the keyword returned
were not relevant, for example, articles on financial audit
and web pages with reports of financial audits. Subsequently,
we manually reviewed the website looking specifically for al
gorithm (and technology) related audits under the Technology
section of the website.
2) The Markup: We manually sifted through the main
page of the Markup’s website identifying audit investigation
report articles. We reviewed each article and extracted thematic
information.
E. Consulting Agencies
1) O’Neil Risk Consulting & Algorithmic Auditing (OR
CAA): We reviewed the website starting from the Home
page and scrolling through the main pages such as What We
Do, NYC Bias Audit and Principles.
2) Eticas: We surveyed the Eticas website, more partic
ularly focusing on the Research page of the Eticas Library
to glean insights into the organization’s algorithmic audit
practice.
3) BABL AI: We started by reviewing the About Us page
of BABL.IA’S website. We then looked at the Services page
and extracted contextual information such as the kind of infor
mation the agency provides. We also reviewed the Research
page for more detailed information on past audits carried out
by the agency.
APPENDIX B
METHODS: QUANTITATIVE CONTENT ANALYSIS
We supplement our qualitative analysis in §IV by analyz
ing words and phrases commonly used in the abstracts and
keywords of the academic audit studies we collected. All but
4 of the N = 341 studies we found were published with an
abstract; 78 were published without keywords.
Many of the most-used terms are fairly generic (e.g. “algo
rithm”, or “system), so we show only a selection of key terms
relevant to our study. We manually filtered the most frequent
1-grams and 2-grams across all abstracts and keywords in
our dataset of academic audits, keeping only those terms
relevant to one of the following dimensions of our analysis
(see Table II): 1) motivation (e.g., “accountability”); 2) target
(including specific entities, e.g., “Facebook”; types of sys
tems, e.g., “computer vision”; and domains, e.g., “healthcare”
or “hiring”); 3) types of harms (e.g., “discrimination” or
“privacy”); 4) methods (e.g., “qualitative” or “ethnography”).
We drop 2-grams that are already encompassed by a more
general 1-gram unless they indicate a meaningfully different
concept or subset (e.g., “criminal justice” is much different
than “justice” alone, whereas, e.g., “algorithm auditing” is
encompassed by “auditing”, given the scope of our study).
We include only terms that were mentioned in more than one
keyword list (more than 0.27% of papers) or in more than 10
abstracts (more than 2.7% of papers).
For further analysis, the entire dataset of academic audits
we collected, along with the code for this analysis, can be
accessed at github.com/ryansteed/academic-audits.
Tables B-I–B-III list the most frequent terms related to
audit motivations and harms, audit targets, and audit methods,
respectively. Tables B-IV–B-VI further compare the most
frequent keywords across audit types.
TABLEB-I
MOSTFREQUENTTERMS:AUDITMOTIVATIONANDTYPESOFHARMS.
Term(s) # times
used
# studies
(%oftotal)
Terms inkeywords(onlyterms in≥1%of studies)
fairness/fair 75 66(25.1%)
bias/biases/biased 75 65(24.7%)
audit/audits/auditing 56 49(18.6%)
accountability/accountable 42 41(15.6%)
ethics/ethical 26 26(9.9%)
impact/impacts 17 15(5.7%)
evaluate/evaluation/evaluations/evaluating 17 13(4.9%)
privacy 16 12(4.6%)
transparency 12 12(4.6%)
explainability/explanations/explanation/xai 12 10(3.8%)
discrimination/discriminatory 8 8(3.0%)
justice 8 8(3.0%)
governance 6 6(2.3%)
hatespeech 6 6(2.3%)
impactassessment(s) 6 6(2.3%)
disparateimpact /disparity/disparities 5 5(1.9%)
genderbias 5 5(1.9%)
harm/harms 5 5(1.9%)
risk 5 5(1.9%)
dataprotection 5 4(1.5%)
interpretability 4 4(1.5%)
misinformation 6 4(1.5%)
security 4 4(1.5%)
surveillance 4 4(1.5%)
trust 4 4(1.5%)
accessibility 3 3(1.1%)
Terms inabstract (onlyterms in≥5%of studies)
bias/biases/biased 325 99(29.4%)
audit/audits/auditing 201 87(25.8%)
impact/impacts 135 85(25.2%)
fairness/fair 271 78(23.1%)
evaluate/evaluation/evaluations/evaluating 114 69(20.5%)
accountability/accountable 112 56(16.6%)
harm/harms 74 44(13.1%)
transparency 62 44(13.1%)
ethics/ethical 65 37(11.0%)
discrimination/discriminatory 57 34(10.1%)
risk 55 34(10.1%)
mitigate 31 28(8.3%)
privacy 56 25(7.4%)
explainability/explanations/explanation/xai 63 22(6.5%)
disparateimpact /disparity/disparities 37 21(6.2%)
justice 31 21(6.2%)
TABLEB-II
MOSTFREQUENTTERMS:TARGETSYSTEMSANDDOMAINS.
Term(s) # times
used
# studies
(%oftotal)
Terms inkeywords(onlyterms in≥1%of studies)
socialmedia/ socialnetworks / facebook/ twitter /youtube 18 17(6.5%)
computervision 13 13(4.9%)
health/healthcare/medical 14 11(4.2%)
natural language/ languageprocessing 22 11(4.2%)
advertising/ads 8 7(2.7%)
platform/platforms 6 6(2.3%)
hiring/employment 5 5(1.9%)
policing/police 5 5(1.9%)
credit 4 4(1.5%)
criminal justice 4 4(1.5%)
multimodal 4 4(1.5%)
searchengines 4 4(1.5%)
speechrecognition/speakerrecognition/speakerverification 6 4(1.5%)
automateddecision 3 3(1.1%)
facial recognition/ facerecognition 3 3(1.1%)
generative 3 3(1.1%)
google 3 3(1.1%)
government 3 3(1.1%)
riskassessment 3 3(1.1%)
socialcredit 3 3(1.1%)
welfare 3 3(1.1%)
Terms inabstract (onlyterms in≥5%of studies)
platform/platforms 99 45(13.4%)
health/healthcare/medical 89 42(12.5%)
socialmedia/ socialnetworks / facebook/ twitter /youtube 99 40(11.9%)
advertising/ads 79 21(6.2%)
hiring/employment 23 18(5.3%)
google 22 17(5.0%)
government 22 17(5.0%)
TABLE B-III
MOST FREQUENT TERMS: METHODS.
Term(s)
# times
used
#
studies
(% of total)
Terms in keywords (only terms in ≥ 1% of studies)
sociotechnical
participatory
hci
qualitative/ethnography/interviews/interviewed/workshop(s)
participatory design
community/communities
human centered
interdisciplinary
9
8
7
7
5
4
4
5
9 (3.4%)
7 (2.7%)
6 (2.3%)
5 (1.9%)
5 (1.9%)
4 (1.5%)
4 (1.5%)
3 (1.1%)
Terms in abstract (only terms in ≥ 5% of studies)
community/communities
qualitative/ethnography/interviews/interviewed/workshop(s)
benchmark/benchmarks
sociotechnical
70
37
50
27
48 (14.2%)
26 (7.7%)
24 (7.1%)
22 (6.5%)
TABLEB-IV
FREQUENTTERMSBYAUDITTYPE:AUDITMOTIVATIONANDTYPESOFHARMS.
Term(s) #studies (%of studiesof thesameaudit type)
DataAudit Product/Model/
Algo.Audit
EcosystemAu
dit
Meta
Commentary
Terms inkeywords
bias/biases/biased 8(29.6%) 48(28.4%) 3(20.0%) 6(11.5%)
fairness/fair 8(29.6%) 40(23.7%) 3(20.0%) 15(28.8%)
audit/audits/auditing 1(3.7%) 35(20.7%) 1(6.7%) 12(23.1%)
accountability/accountable 1(3.7%) 16(9.5%) 3(20.0%) 21(40.4%)
ethics/ethical 3(11.1%) 13(7.7%) 0 10(19.2%)
Terms inabstract
bias/biases/biased 18(39.1%) 69(32.5%) 2(13.3%) 10(15.6%)
fairness/fair 8(17.4%) 45(21.2%) 4(26.7%) 21(32.8%)
audit/audits/auditing 4(8.7%) 57(26.9%) 1(6.7%) 25(39.1%)
evaluate/evaluation/evaluations/evaluating 11(23.9%) 45(21.2%) 2(13.3%) 11(17.2%)
impact/impacts 12(26.1%) 52(24.5%) 4(26.7%) 17(26.6%)
accountability/accountable 4(8.7%) 29(13.7%) 5(33.3%) 18(28.1%)
transparency 5(10.9%) 26(12.3%) 4(26.7%) 9(14.1%)
ethics/ethical 7(15.2%) 19(9.0%) 2(13.3%) 9(14.1%)
harm/harms 8(17.4%) 19(9.0%) 4(26.7%) 13(20.3%)
risk 2(4.3%) 20(9.4%) 3(20.0%) 9(14.1%)
mitigate 3(6.5%) 18(8.5%) 3(20.0%) 4(6.2%)
Showingonlyterms thatappear in≥15%ofstudiesforat leastoneaudit type(bolded).
TABLEB-V
FREQUENTTERMSBYAUDITTYPE:TARGETSYSTEMSANDDOMAINS.
Term(s) #studies (%of studiesof thesameaudit type)
DataAudit Product/Model/
Algo.Audit
EcosystemAu
dit
Meta
Commentary
Terms inkeywords
socialmedia/socialnetworks/facebook/ twitter
/youtube
0 17(10.1%) 0 0
natural language/ languageprocessing 3(11.1%) 6(3.6%) 1(6.7%) 1(1.9%)
computervision 7(25.9%) 5(3.0%) 0 1(1.9%)
welfare 1(3.7%) 0 2(13.3%) 0
childwelfare 0 0 2(13.3%) 0
Terms inabstract
socialmedia/socialnetworks/facebook/ twitter
/youtube
2(4.3%) 38(17.9%) 0 0
platform/platforms 1(2.2%) 42(19.8%) 1(6.7%) 1(1.6%)
health/healthcare/medical 5(10.9%) 30(14.2%) 1(6.7%) 6(9.4%)
computervision 7(15.2%) 8(3.8%) 0 1(1.6%)
natural language/ languageprocessing 5(10.9%) 9(4.2%) 0 1(1.6%)
hiring/employment 2(4.3%) 11(5.2%) 2(13.3%) 3(4.7%)
government 2(4.3%) 8(3.8%) 3(20.0%) 4(6.2%)
welfare 1(2.2%) 3(1.4%) 2(13.3%) 0
childwelfare 0 1(0.5%) 2(13.3%) 0
education 1(2.2%) 6(2.8%) 2(13.3%) 1(1.6%)
Showingonlyterms thatappear in≥10%ofstudiesforat leastoneaudit type(bolded).
TABLEB-VI
FREQUENTTERMSBYAUDITTYPE:METHODS.
Term(s) #studies (%of studiesof thesameaudit type)
DataAudit Product/Model/
Algo.Audit
EcosystemAu
dit
Meta
Commentary
Terms inkeywords
qualitative/ethnography/interviews/interviewed/workshop(s) 3(1.8%) 2(13.3%) 0
participatory 1(0.6%) 3(20.0%) 3(5.8%)
participatorydesign 0 3(20.0%) 2(3.8%)
humancentered 2(1.2%) 2(13.3%) 0
Terms inabstract
benchmark/benchmarks 14(30.4%) 6(2.8%) 0 4(6.2%)
community/communities 9(19.6%) 21(9.9%) 6(40.0%) 12(18.8%)
qualitative/ethnography/interviews/interviewed/
workshop(s)
3(6.5%) 13(6.1%) 6(40.0%) 4(6.2%)
sociotechnical 1(2.2%) 12(5.7%) 1(6.7%) 8(12.5%)
hci 0 3(1.4%) 2(13.3%) 1(1.6%)
participatory 1(2.2%) 0 2(13.3%) 1(1.6%)
Showingonlyterms thatappear in≥10%ofstudiesforat leastoneaudit type(bolded).
APPENDIX C
ADDITIONAL RESULTS
Below, we include more detailed summaries of the non
academic auditors we reviewed.
TABLEC-VII
CONSULTINGAGENCIES
Consulting
Agencies
ORCAA Eticas BablAI
Motivation regulatorycompliance, performance testing,
measureandmitigatedisparateperformance
helpcompanies complywith legal require
ments,securityanddataprotection, fairness,
biasandmodelaccuracy
biasassessment, riskandimpactassessment
Target predictivescoringsystems,hiringalgorithms,
healthcareAI,AIplatforms,ADS,FRT
risk assessment algorithms; social media
platforms such as tiktok andyoutube; ride
hailingapps, suchasuber, cabifyandbolt;
algorithmsusedbygovernmentsandcompa
nies
their clients include universities, small AI
companies, startups likeProctorio
Types of
harm
discrimination, bias, measure gender and
race/ethnicity bias, assess for regulatory
compliance
algorithmic systems (their functioning), to
detect anomalies or practices that couldbe
unfair towardsprotectedgroupsorsociety
bias, fairness, effectiveness, transparency,
bestpoliciesandstandards,privacy, compli
ance
Institutional
context
Theagencyassists techgiants andgovern
ments,whileitsauditsprioritizetheconcerns
ofmarginalizedcommunities
The consulting agency champions fairness
for protected groups, yet also safeguards
corporations fromfinancial andreputational
risks.
Ultimately, they are consultants that work
with/forclients tohelporgsbuildtrustwith
stakeholders.
Methods internal tool (EthicalMatrixframework), re
viewdocuments
data management planning, encryption,
ethicsduediligenceandvetting
in-house developed set of criteria used to
conduct conduct bias testing, reviewdocu
mentations, interactwithstakeholders
Impact someinfluence(albeitindirect)onpolicy(on
theWhiteHouseAIethicsblueprint)
notclear nonestated
TABLEC-VIII
CORPORATEAUDITS
Corporate
Audits
Google Facebook
Motivation identifypotential issuesrelatingtocelebrityrecognitionproducts help thecompany identify, prioritise, and implement improvements
in accordancewith civil rights ”at the behest of the civil rights
communityandmembersof theUScongress”
Target Google’scelebrityrecognitionAPI Facebook
Types of
harm
humanrights*impacts* racial injustice,votersuppression,hatespeech, algorithmicbias
Methods consultationwithstakeholders,dialoguewithexpert resources interviewwith hundreds of civil rights orgs and advocates and
membersofcongress
Impact incorporationofsomeof thefindings intoproductdesign facebookcommittedtoimplement (noinformationif thesechanges
were infact implemented) anewadvertisingsysteminaccordance
withcivil rights
TABLEC-IX
JOURNALISM
Journalism TheMarkUp Propublica
Motivation Accountability, exposedisparities injusticeandillegalpractice accountability, exposedisparities inperformance, privacyviola
tions,discriminationindeployedsystems
Target argecorporations/institutions,socialmediaplatforms,algorithms,
contentmoderators
Gov’t ADS, VLOPs (Facebook advertising, Amazon product
placement)publicprogramswithdigital sites
Typesofharm Disparities, fraud, discrimination, legal compliance, privacy
breach
discrimination,privacyharms, culturalgenocide, injustice
Institutional
context
Targetingmostlytechfirms/platforms,onbehalfofgeneralpublic;
fundedbyfoundationsandprivatedonors
Targetingpublic agencies andprivate companies, onbehalf of
generalpublic; fundedbyfoundationsandprivatedonors
Methods Inhouse audit tools, interview, data donation, reviewing docu
ments
scraping,datadonation,APIexploitation,evaluation, interviews,
qualitativeevidence
Impacts highimpact resultinginlegislativeandsystemic(intheUS) Highimpact, legislativeaction, companypolicychanges,COM
PASacanonicalworkthat setpresident foracademicresearch
Audit Type
FAccT
Publication venue
AIES
Other ACM
Other non−ACM
Product/Model/
Algo. Audit
Data Audit
Ecosystem
Audit
Meta−
Commentary
0
50
100
# audit studies
Fig. C-I. Number of collected academic audit studies published in each year, grouped by publication source.
TABLE C-X
LAW FIRMS
Law
firms
BNH.AI
Foxglove
AWO
Audit
type
information not available
Case study. algorithms, social media plat
forms, living conditions of tech workers
evaluative reviews of general industries or
technologies, case studies
Audit
Goal
compliance with standards
keeping tech giants and governments ac
countable
evaluate/design governance, protect data
rights
Audit
target
models and data
social media platforms, governments, content
moderator, warehouse workers, gig-workers
VLOPs, private companies, FRT
Type of
harm
legal compliance/liability/legal defence
ustice, disparate performance, enforcing le
gal requirements
privacy/data rights/surveillance violations,
safety, digital manipulation/exploitation
Methods
information not available
legal compliance, anecdotal evidence
documentation, critical commentary, policy
development, legal/compliance research
Impact
information not available
Sforced disclosure of secret contract between
tech corps and governments, stopped the
UK Home Office use of visa-streaming algo,
reversed Ofqual’s A level grading algorithm
litigation, change to govt’s and corporate
policy/strategy
Power
Analysis
corporate/for profit, confidential and privi
leged
non-profit
corporate/for profit, consulting for both cor
porate and public agencies
TABLE C-XI
REGULATORS
Regulators ICO
NIST
General
Objec
tives
Uphold information rights. Enforcing legal requirements. Regulatory
interventions through guidance, enforcement notice, and issuing mon
etary penalties.
Quality assurance, develop best standards and regulatory practices
Audit
type
Case studies
Meta-commentary
Audit
Goal
Investigate and enforce regulations
Establish standards
Audit
target
Data, data sharing and management documents
FRT, ADS
Type of
harm
Legal compliance, privacy breach, data management
Racial disparities, physical safety, functionality, privacy
Methods
Interview, testing, reviewing documents
Data trust, accuracy evaluation, benchmarking
Impact
Significant monetary penalties issued
Significant contribution on standardisation
Power
Analysis
Targets companies and gov’t agencies; has authority to enforce laws
with fines
Targets companies and gov’t agencies; establishes standards but no
enforcement authority
TABLEC-XII
CIVILSOCIETY
CivilSociety EFF RLL TheCitizenLab MTM AdaLovelace ACLU
Motivation accountability,
non-profit and
independent
accountability,
non-profit and
independent
accountability accountability accountability accountability
Target ADS, online plat
forms, largecorpo
rations
ADS, liedetectors,
border patrolling
drones
ADS, apps, code,
websites, FRT,
surveillance tech,
hardware (phones
and other devices
usedbypoliticians
and activists),
software
biometric data,
digital IDsystems,
border surveillance
vendors,
surveillance
drones, FRT,
iris scan data,
lie detector tech,
thermal cameras,
algorithmicmotion
detectors, AI
powered satellites,
anklemonitorsand
GPS tags, voice
recognitiontech
AI anddata-driven
systems generally,
biometric data
(facial recognition)
and healthcare in
particular
ADS, platform
advertising,
facial recognition
tech, medical
algorithms,
online advertising
(particularly
Facebook),
welfare programs,
insurance
pricing, redlining
algorithms
Typesofharm security
vulnerabilities,
fair use, user
rights,privacy, free
speech, resisting
surveillance,
encryption,
consumer
protection
disparities in
refugee claim
recognition rates,
human rights
violations, digital
rights violations,
xenophobic
and racial
discrimination,
privacy
privacy, security,
transparency,
surveillance,
spyware,
censorship,
freedom of
expression
racial discrim
ination, border
surveillance,
xenophobia,
human rights
violations
privacyharms, due
processharms,dis
parateimpact
fallacyoffunction
ality,culturalhege
mony,hatespeech/
toxicity
Methods litigation,
policy analysis,
grassroot activism,
technology
development
interviews with
refugees, data
collection, analysis
and interactive
visualisation from
the Immigration
and Refugee
Board (IRB)
through Access
to Information
Request,
documentations of
deportation and
refused refugee
claims, film
making
in-house tools,
forensicanalysisof
devices, interviews
document and
archive migration
tech, interviews
with people
crossing borders,
investigative
analysis,
photography
participatory
methods, including
opinion polling;
also policy
researchandpolicy
development
quantitative
evaluation of
operational
systems (but
not necessarily
as rigorous as
academic papers;
may be simple
metrics); data
acquired through
privileged access,
public records
requests, scraping
Impact high impact. Sued
andwonacasefor
First Amendment
protection for
software code for
privacy protection,
class-actionlawsuit
that resulted in
removing Sony
BMG off the
market, won a
rulings against the
US government’s
attempt to track
locationofmobile
phone users, won
Proctorio lawsuit
on behalf of a
student
